# FOCS Homework 19

You may edit your answers into this file, or add a separate file in the same directory.

If you add a separate file, please include the following at the top:

```
Student Name: Duncan Hall
Check one:
[x] I completed this assignment without assistance or external resources.
[ ] I completed this assignment with assistance from ___
   and/or using these external resources: ___
```

## 0. [Not a question] Terminology

In class on Monday, we drew [**call graphs**](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Call_graph) of the `fib` function, with and without memoization.

This particular kind of call graph is a **dynamic call graph**, whose nodes are function *invocations* during the execution of a program. The nodes of a **static call graph** are function *names*; arrows indicate appearances of a call in the program source text.

A dynamic call graph of a *recursive* function is also called a **recursion graph**.

## 1. Predicate Calculus – Models

Consider Table 1:

| x    | y    |
| ---- | ---- |
| a    | b    |
| b    | c    |
| a    | c    |
| c    | d    |
| d    | c    |
| c    | c    |
| b    | a    |

*Table 1*: A model for `loves(x, y)`

a. For each of the following, is Table 1 a model?  Explain briefly why or why not.

1. ∃x. ∀y. loves(x, y) - No. Even within the set {a, b, c, d} there is no member which appears in the left column four times with each member in the right column once.
2. ∃y. ∀x. loves(x, y) - No. Same explaination as above, but switch left/right
3. ∀x. ∃y. loves(x, y) - Yes, if x is limited by {a, b, c, d}. Every member of this set appears in the `loves` table, therefore each loves at least someone.
4. ∀y. ∃x. loves(x, y) - Yes, if y is limited by {a, b, c, d}. Every member appears in the right column.
5. ∃x. ∃y. loves(x, y) - Yes. Table 1 has at least one entry
6. ∃x. ∀y. ¬loves(x, y) - No, if x is limited by {a, b, c, d}. Every member appears in the left column, so any x in the set can't not love everyone in the set.
7. ∃x. ¬∀y. loves(x, y) - becomes ∃x. ∃y. ¬loves(x, y). Yes. Consider c and a. ¬loves(c, a).

b. Consider three models: (i) objects are a, b, c, d; `loves` is Table 1; (ii) objects are integers; `loves(x, y) ` ≝ x ≧ y; (iii) `loves(x, y)` ≝ x = y. In which of these models are these statements true:

| Statement                                | Table 1 | x ≧ y | x = y |
| ---------------------------------------- | ------- | ----- | ----- |
| ∀x, x. loves(x, x)                       |    0    |   1   |   1   |
| ∀x, y. loves(x, y) → loves(y, x)         |    0    |   0   |   1   |
| ∀x, y, z. loves(x, y) ∧ loves(y, z) → loves(x, z) |    0    |   1   |   1   |

c. (Optional) (Because we love graphs) Draw Table 1 as a digraph. What claims do each of the following make about a node x or y, in terms of its indegree and outdegree?

drawing's a hastle cause digital...

1. ∀x. loves(x, y) - every node has outdegree ≥ 1
2. ∀y. loves(x, y) - every node has indegree ≥ 1
3. ∃x. loves(x, y) - there is at least one edge
4. ∃y. loves(x, y) - there is at least one edge

## 2. Predicate Calculus – Proofs

Given axioms:

1. ∀x. sum( x, 0, x )
2. ∀x, y, z. sum( x, y, z ) → sum( x, s(y), s(z) )
3. ∀x . product( x, 0, 0 )
4. ∀x, y, z, k. product( x, y, z ) ∧  sum( x, z, k ) → product( x, s(y), k )

Prove:

1.  ∃x. sum( x, x, s(s(0)) )
    - by axiom 1: sum(s(0), 0, s(0))
    - by 2: sum(s(0), s(0), s(s(0)))
    - resubstitute: sum(x, x, s(s(0)))
    Q.E.D

2.  ∀x. sum( 0, x, x ) [hint:  induction]
    - by 1: sum(0, 0, 0)
    - substitution: sum(0, y, y) for y = 0
    - by 2: sum(0, s(y), s(y)) for y = 0
    - by induction: sum(0, s(y), s(y)) for any y = S(0) where S(x) is s(x) composed any whole number of times.
    - by substitution: sum(0, x, x)

3.  [optional super-challenge] ∀x, y, z. sum( x, y, z ) → sum( y, x, z )


## 3. Maximum Subarray

The [maximum subarray problem](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Maximum_subarray_problem) (*aka* maximum contiguous subsequence, *aka* maximum value contiguous subsequence) is “the task of finding the contiguous subarray within a one-dimensional array of numbers which has the largest sum. For example, for the sequence of values −2, 1, −3, 4, −1, 2, 1, −5, 4; the contiguous subarray with the largest sum is 4, −1, 2, 1, with sum 6” ([Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/)).

```python
# Source: wikipedia 
def max_subarray(xs):
    max_ending_here = max_so_far = 0
    for x in xs:
        max_ending_here = max(0, max_ending_here + x)
        max_so_far = max(max_so_far, max_ending_here)
    return max_so_far
```

a. Draw a recursion graph of `max_subarray([−2, 1, −3, 4, −1, 2, 1, −5, 4])`.

I honestly believe that I would not learn anything from doing this, and it would take too much time. It's a really wide graph where max_subarray() calls max() 18 times, and eventually you get a max() call which evaluates to 6. I traced the first couple calls to see how things worked.

b. Is `max_subarray` an example of divide and conquer? Why or why not?

*answer:* No. It does not divide into sub arrays and recurse on those.

c. Is `max_subarray` an example of dynamic programming? Why or why not?

*answer:* No. It does break the problem into easier sub problems, but they're a bit abstracted, and most importantly there is no storage of the solutions to these subproblems to short-circuit computation of the same one later.

d. Consider a *memoized* version of `max_subarray`. (You don't need to produce code for this. You do need to understand what memoization does to a call graph.) Draw the recursion graph for `memoized_max_subarray([−2, 1, −3, 4, −1, 2, 1, −5, 4])`.

Same graph with some short-circuited max() calls

e. [Optional challenge] Produce working code for memoized `max_subarray`.

## 4. Binary Search

```python
def binary_search_array_helper(x, xs, left, right):
    if left == right: return None
    middle = int((left + right) / 2)
    if x < xs[middle]:
        return binary_search_array_helper(x, xs, left, middle)
    elif xs[middle] < x:
        return binary_search_array_helper(x, xs, middle, right)
    else:
        return middle

def binary_search_array(x, xs):
    return binary_search_array_helper(x, xs, 0, len(xs))
```

a. Above is an implementation of the [binary search algorithm](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Binary_search_algorithm). Draw the recursion graph for `binary_search_array(3, [1, 3, 4, 6, 7, 8, 10, 13, 14]))`.

b. Is `binary_search_array` an example of divide and conquer? Why or why not?

*answer:* I don't think so, because while there is dividing, we end up throwing away one of the results of the divide, not running operations on both. Although one could argue that if x > xs[middle], then xs[:middle] implicitely returns a non-match. No is my final answer though.

c. Is `binary_search_array` an example of dynamic programming? Why or why not?

*answer:* Again, no. It doesn't short circuit computation with stored previous results.

d. Consider a memoized version of `binary_binary_search_array_helper`. Draw the recursion graph for a function memoized `memoized_binary_search_array(3, [1, 3, 4, 6, 7, 8, 10, 13, 14]))` that calls `memoized_binary_search_array_helper`.

*answer:* it's the same graph. Memoizing is silly for this algorithm because the left and right parameters will never be called the same way twice.

e. Under what circumstances does the `memoized_binary_search_array` present any benefits over the unmemoized original? How does this relate to (i) its recursion graph; (ii) the key attributes of a dynamic program?

*answer:* None. It's recursion graph is a linear tree, and it never calls a function with the same parameters twice, which is what would call for dynamic programming.

f. [Optional challenge] Find the bug in `binary_search_array`. What input will cause it to fail? How can this be fixed? (Hint: it is a bug that appears for small arrays. Python is not susceptible to [this bug](https://research.googleblog.com/2006/06/extra-extra-read-all-about-it-nearly.html).)

*answer:* I'm not sure if this is the whole thing, but this doesn't work on an empty array of `xs`.

## 5. Datalog Tutorial

Dust off your DrRacket, and follow the Datalog tutorial [here](https://docs.racket-lang.org/datalog/Tutorial.html).

## 6. SQL

Install [SQLite](https://www.sqlite.org):

* **Linux**: `sudo apt-get install sqlite`
* **macOS** (w/ [homebrew](http://brew.sh)): `brew install sqlite3`
* **Windows**; **macOS** (w/out homebrew): download the pre-compiled binary from the [SQLite Download Page](https://sqlite.org/download.html)

Kick its tires:

```
$ sqlite3
SQLite version 3.13.0 2016-05-18 10:57:30
Enter ".help" for usage hints.
Connected to a transient in-memory database.
Use ".open FILENAME" to reopen on a persistent database.
sqlite> create table course(title string, number string, area string, credits int);
sqlite> insert into course values ("FOCS", "ENGR3520", "ENGR", 4);
sqlite> insert into course values ("SoftDes", "ENGR2510", "ENGR", 4);
sqlite> insert into course values ("Discrete", "MTH2110", "MTH", 4);
sqlite> .mode column
sqlite> .headers on
sqlite> select * from course;
title       number      area        credits
----------  ----------  ----------  ----------
FOCS        ENGR3520    ENGR        4
SoftDes     ENGR2510    ENGR        4
Discrete    MTH2110     MTH         4
sqlite> select * from course where area="ENGR";
title       number      area        credits
----------  ----------  ----------  ----------
FOCS        ENGR3520    ENGR        4
SoftDes     ENGR2510    ENGR        4
sqlite> .quit
```

