# FOCS Homework 10, for Day 11

You may edit your answers into this file, or add a separate file in the same directory.

If you add a separate file, please include the following at the top:

```
Student Name: Frankly Olin [change to your name]
Check one:
[X] I completed this assignment without assistance or external resources.
[ ] I completed this assignment with assistance from ___
   and/or using these external resources: ___
```

## I. Logic

### 1.

The following tables are [truth tables](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Truth_table).

_true_ and _false_ are represented by `T` and `F`. _OR(false, true)_ is commonly written in [infix notation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Infix_notation): `F OR T`.

The second table shows the value of the function _a OR b_, for all possible values _a_ and _b_. For example, _false OR true_ (the second row) has the value _true_ (the final cell of that row).

_a_ | _b_ | _a_ AND _b_
----|-----|---
 F  |  F  | F
 F  |  T  | F
 T  |  F  | F
 T  |  T  | T

_a_ | _b_ | _a_ OR _b_
----|-----|---
 F  |  F  | F
 F  |  T  | T
 T  |  F  | T
 T  |  T  | T

_a_ | _b_ | _a_ XOR _b_
----|-----|---
 F  |  F  | F
 F  |  T  | T
 T  |  F  | T
 T  |  T  | F

a. Construct the truth table for _a XOR (b XOR a)_.
*answer:*
_a_ | _b_ | _a XOR (b XOR a)_
----|-----|---
 F  |  F  | F
 F  |  T  | T
 T  |  F  | F
 T  |  T  | T

b. Which function corresponds to the English word "or", as used in "You will eat your meat OR you can't have any pudding" (where _a_ = "You will eat your meat" and _b_ = "you can't have any pudding").

*answer:*
then/if
Either: meat p pudding (TT -> T, TF -> F), meat NOR pudding (FF -> T)

## II. Questions 2–6 are the same as in-class activities 2-6

### 2.

Consider the following context-free grammar G:

```
E -> E + E | T         # <- added "| T"
T -> T x T | (E) | a
```

Convert G to a PDA.

### 3.

Convert grammar G from (2) to Chomsky Normal Form.
*answer:*

```
T -> T T_+

T -> T T_x

T -> a

T -> P_( P_T

P_( -> (

P_T -> T P_)

P_) -> )

T_x -> S_x T

S_x -> x

T_+ -> S_+ T

S_+ -> +
```
### 4.

Is the grammar G's language a regular language? If yes, produce a FSA or regular expression for this language. If not, show this. 

*answer:*

non-regular

Let `w` be `(^p a + a )^p` in G. The pumping lemma states that if this language is regular, there should exist a pumpable substring `y` in the first p characters of any word in it's language. However, any substring of `w` will be `(+`, which is not pumpable on account of G being language with sets of matching parentheses.


### 5.

Theorem 1: The language {a^n b^n c^n} is not a context-free language.

a. Use Theorem 1, together with the languages {a^i b^i c^j} and {a^i b^j c^j}, to show that the set of context-free languages is not closed under intersection.

*answer:*

{a^i b^i c^j} and {a^i b^j c^j} are both context-free languages represented by the following:
```
S -> Sc | T
T -> aTb | e
```
and
```
S -> aS | T
T -> bTc | e
```
The intersection of these two languages is {a^n b^n c^n}, which by Theorem 1 is not a context-free language. Therefore the set of context-free languages is not closed under intersection.


b. Use the pumping lemma for context-free languages [Sipser pp. 125] to prove Theorem 1.

The pumping lemma for context-free grammers says that for some breakdown of any string `s=vwxyz` in the context-free language where `|wxy| ≤ p` and `|wy| > 0`, `w` and `y` can be pumped to produce `v w^n x y^n z` in the original language. Let `word` be `a^p b^p c^p` in `L = {a^n b^n c^n}`. If `word` is split so that `wxy` includes only some number of `a`s, the pumped word is not included in `L` as the number of `a`s varies independently of the number of `b`s and `c`s. Similar for `wxy` in `b*` and `wxy` in `c*`. If `wxy` in `a*b*`, `a` and `b` will be pumped independently from `c`, and thus the pumped word will not be within `L`. Similarly with `wxy` in `b*c*`. There are no other possibilities to break down `word` into `vwxyz`, thus `L = {a^n b^n c^n}` cannot be represented by a context-free grammer.

### 6.

Consider the context-free grammar G:

```
S -> NP VP
NP -> NP PP
NP -> DET N
VP -> V NP
VP -> VP PP
DET -> a | the
N -> boy | girl | flowers | binoculars
V -> touches | sees
PP -> P NP
P -> in | from | with
```

a. Show that the string "the girl touches the boy with the flowers" has two
different leftmost derivations.

*answer:*
```
S
NP VP
DET N VP
the N VP
the girl VP
----- option 1
the girl VP PP
the girl V NP PP
the girl touches NP PP
the girl touches DET N PP
the girl touches the N PP
the girl touches the boy PP
----- option 2
the girl V NP
the girl touches NP
the girl touches NP PP
the girl touches DET N PP
the girl touches the N PP
the girl touches the boy PP
----- back together
the girl touches the boy P NP
the girl touches the boy with NP
the girl touches the boy with DET N
the girl touches the boy with the N
the girl touches the boy with the flowers
```

b. Describe in English the two different meanings of this sentence.

*answer:*

Two different parse trees; two different meanings. Who is the one with the flowers?

The girl could be using the flowers to touch the boy, or she could jsut be touching the boy who is "with" (read: holding/in possesion of) the flowers.

c. Use G to generate another ambiguous sentence.

*answer:*

the boy sees the girl with binoculars.

d. Modify G so that it generates strings with adjectives: `the girl saw the tall boy`, `the girl touches the boy with a purple flower`.

*answer:*
```
S -> NP VP
NP -> NP PP
NP -> DET AN
AN -> A N
AN -> N
VP -> V NP
VP -> VP PP
A -> tall | purple | smart
DET -> a | the
N -> boy | girl | flowers | binoculars
V -> touches | sees
PP -> P NP
P -> in | from | with
```


You don't need to know this, but here's how the variable names relate to linguistics.

Variable | meaning
---|---
S | sentence
DET | determiner (article)
N | noun
NP | noun phrase
P | preposition
PP | prepositional phrase
V | verb
VP | verb phrase

[Adapted from Sipser 2.8.]
